Add post for new Android client and other improvements (#74)
jellyfin/jellyfin-blog: content/posts/android-next.md

---
title: 'Android Developers Rejoice'
subtitle: 'We have a brand new web wrapper for Android sans Cordova!'
author: 'dkanada'
githubusername: 'dkanada'
date: 2020-08-28T04:16:09-04:00
justify: 'center'
---

This will be a net benefit for users and developers alike!

> Everyone will enjoy the native video player spearheaded by [Stampede10343](https://github.com/Stampede10343) and [vitorsemeano](https://github.com/vitorsemeano) over the course of several months.

Reviewer: Yes we have the new video player but it's not enabled by default. Should be said more clearly IMO

Reviewer: I now see it's mentioned in the ExoPlayer section

> [Maxr1998](https://github.com/Maxr1998) valiantly ported the Cordova portions to native Java (and Kotlin) which means Android developers will feel right at home with the new codebase!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Maxr1998](https://github.com/Maxr1998) valiantly ported the Cordova portions to Kotlin (and a bit of Java) which means Android developers will feel right at home with the new codebase!
```

The app is kotlin-first, not java-first.

<!--more-->

### Migration

> The new release will be a drop-in replacement for the deprecated Cordova client, meaning you can just update from GitHub or F-Droid as you would have previously.

Reviewer: It's a drop-in but you need to enter your server URL again (we can't migrate that from Cordova unfortunately) and because the local storage is gone you need to set your client settings again; authenticate, set theme etc. etc.

Azure has also been updated so the releases will be automatically built, and Weblate now points to the new codebase.
Older versions will remain on [our repository](https://repo.jellyfin.org) for the time being but don't expect them to stay forever, so if you have some reason to stash the older APKs download them soon!

> Anyone who happened to be using the alpha builds will need to reinstall since we decremented the build version for the official release.

Reviewer: Not true, we had some issues in the first 2 release candidates but starting from rc3 and the release the version code will increment and thus you can just update it.

> Please note that this client has a new set of translations, so if you speak more than one language head on over to Weblate to help out the new client!

### ExoPlayer

> The key feature for this release was ExoPlayer, so we've reserved a whole section for news regarding the player and its functionality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The key feature for this release is ExoPlayer, so we've reserved a whole section for news regarding the player and its functionality.
```

It's currently disabled by default since there may be small issues, but it works quite well in our experience.

> The main feature missing at the moment is a bitrate limit, but it should get added eventually.

Reviewer: SyncPlay is missing too (which is quite the miss since that's one of our key-features for 10.6)

Author: SyncPlay should already exist since the current Android client is tagged with 10.6.0 on the web source.

Reviewer: It's missing from ExoPlayer afaik

Reviewer 2: As is Casting.

There will be a new section in the user settings for native clients from which you can enable ExoPlayer, among other options.
A toggle for the notification dismissal was also added for customization.
Of course, ExoPlayer support means better support for codecs during video playback as well!
H265 should be working without transcodes, and several other problematic codecs are now much less troublesome with the new update.

### Future

The goal is to use a mobile-first interface for ExoPlayer so we can focus more on desktop for the normal web player.

> Things like double tap to seek, volume and brightness sliders, and larger controls are all things that would fit with that plan.

Reviewer 3: Double-tap to seek is already implemented, the sliders/gestures are still missing. Maybe that should be said more clearly.

One minor issue is that you'll have to add your server and credentials again since we couldn't pull the information from Cordova.
Local user settings such as the theme will also be reset after the update.
Azure has also been updated so the releases will be automatically built, and Weblate now points to the new codebase.
Older versions will remain on [our repository](https://repo.jellyfin.org) for the time being but don't expect them to stay forever, so if you have some reason to stash the older APKs download them soon!

> Please note that this client has a new set of translations, so if you speak more than one language head on over to Weblate to help out the new client!

### ExoPlayer

The key feature for this release is ExoPlayer, so we've reserved a whole section for news regarding the player and its functionality.
It's currently disabled by default since there may be small issues, but it works quite well in our experience.
The main features missing at the moment are bitrate limiting and SyncPlay, but they should get added eventually.

> There will be a new section in the user settings for native clients from which you can enable ExoPlayer, among other options.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There is be a new section in the user settings for the native client from which you can enable ExoPlayer, among other options.
```

Author: I'll avoid this one since `is be` isn't grammatically correct.

Reviewer 3: Oops, that's a typo xD
Should just be "is".

A toggle for the notification dismissal was also added for customization.

> Of course, ExoPlayer support means better support for codecs during video playback as well!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Of course, using ExoPlayer means support for more codecs during video playback as well!
```

H265 should be working without transcodes, and several other problematic codecs are now much less troublesome with the new update.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Note that the included device profile still needs some tweaking to actually mark every codec that the phone supports as supported to the server.

```

### Future

The goal is to use a mobile-first interface for ExoPlayer so we can focus more on desktop for the normal web player.

> Double tap to seek has already been implemented and is one example change that wouldn't fit well on the HTML5 video player.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Bigger, easier clickable buttons and double tap to seek are some of the changes setting the new interface apart from the HTML5 video player.
```

As usual, since this is a volunteer project we don't actually have set milestones, so if you want something done, the quickest method is to add it yourself!
Head over to Matrix or Freenode and get in touch with the Android developers if you'd like to talk about adding a new feature.

> GitHub is also an excellent place to discuss long term changes for the new client now that native Java and Kotlin are available.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
GitHub is also an excellent place to discuss long term changes for the new client now that a more modern build process is in place.
```

One minor issue is that you'll have to add your server and credentials again since we couldn't pull the information from Cordova.
Local user settings such as the theme will also be reset after the update.
Azure has also been updated so the releases will be automatically built, and Weblate now points to the new codebase.
Older versions will remain on [our repository](https://repo.jellyfin.org) for the time being but don't expect them to stay forever, so if you have some reason to stash the older APKs download them soon!

> Please note that this client has a new set of translations, so if you speak more than one language head on over to Weblate to help out the new client!

### ExoPlayer

The key feature for this release is ExoPlayer, so we've reserved a whole section for news regarding the player and its functionality.
It's currently disabled by default since there may be small issues, but it works quite well in our experience.
The main features missing at the moment are bitrate limiting and SyncPlay, but they should get added eventually.

> There is a new section in the user settings for native clients from which you can enable ExoPlayer, among other options.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There is a new section in the user settings for the native client from which you can enable ExoPlayer, among other options.
```

A toggle for the notification dismissal was also added for customization.
Of course, using ExoPlayer means support for more codecs during video playback as well!
H265 should be working without transcodes, and several other problematic codecs are now much less troublesome with the new update.

> Note that the included device profile still needs some tweaking to actually mark every codec that the phone supports as supported to the server.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

> Note that the included device profile still needs some tweaking to actually mark every codec that the phone supports as supported to the server. You can follow the progress on this [here](https://github.com/jellyfin/jellyfin-android/issues/28).
```

Reviewer: I'd prefer having the URL like [jellyfin-android#28](#link)

Reviewer 3: Updated.

### Future

The goal is to use a mobile-first interface for ExoPlayer so we can focus more on desktop for the normal web player.
Bigger, easier clickable buttons and double tap to seek are some of the changes setting the new interface apart from the HTML5 video player.
As usual, since this is a volunteer project we don't actually have set milestones, so if you want something done, the quickest method is to add it yourself!

> Head over to Matrix or Freenode and get in touch with the Android developers if you'd like to talk about adding a new feature.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Head over to [Matrix](https://matrix.to/#/+jellyfin:matrix.org) or Freenode and get in touch with the Android developers if you'd like to talk about adding a new feature.
```

> GitHub is also an excellent place to discuss long term changes for the new client now that a more modern build process is in place.

Reviewer 3: Should we link the Matrix channel and GitHub issues here?

Author: sounds good to me

> GitHub is also an excellent place to discuss long term changes for the new client now that a more modern build process is in place.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Our [GitHub](https://github.com/jellyfin/jellyfin-android) is also an excellent place to discuss long term changes for the new client now that a more modern build process is in place.
```
